Welcome to the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction
today. A presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association. And now,
your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane, Keith Johnson, and David Carson, and this show will be on
the writer, Arthur C. Clarke.
Arthur C. Clarke was born in Great Britain, served in the Royal Air Force during
World War II, in which he was part of a radar reconnaissance team, and then
wrote in London for several years, and then is now residing in Sri Lanka. He's
probably one of the most well-known science fiction authors living today. I
would say that he's probably one of the most influential writers of the last 30
years, both in terms of money and in what he's contributed to the field, what
he's given to other authors. But if people had to mention a science fiction
author, people who don't read science fiction regularly, I think he would be one
of the three or four that they would usually come up with, especially because of
his movie, 2001. 2001, A Space Odyssey, was a movie by Stanley Kubrick, written
by Stanley Kubrick and Arthur C. Clarke, and it was released in 1968. The movie
was heralded as one of the greatest science fiction movies ever made. I don't
think there's any doubt of that. The techniques used in the movie, the beauty of
it, I think, was almost incomparable. I think people today would still call it
probably the best one ever made. And I believe that I've read reviewers who've
said that it was the first science fiction movie that was, it looked lived in.
The people were doing normal things. They were using communications devices that
probably people in the future will use. Their way of life. The whole technique,
the way it was arranged. Made it very plausible. I mean, putting Howard
Johnson's up in an orbital space station kind of brought things back to home.
And didn't they have Bell Telephone? Yeah, I believe so. On their communication,
their video communication devices and so forth. It was very realistic. I think
that was one of the biggest influences it had, you know, beyond the technology
of it, the special effects and so forth. And, of course, it had a tremendous
influence on subsequent movies, partly in the fact that I think a lot of the
science fiction movies, the really good ones that have been made since then,
would not have been considered possible if 2001 had not been such a great
success. And, of course, the content of some of these later movies has been
influenced by 2001. Many of the same themes and many of the same types of
effects and settings came out of them that were started off in 2001. I think
probably it, of course, it came from a short story, "The Sentinel", which Clarke
had published back in the 50s. And he expanded that. He and Kubrick expanded
that for the movie. But I think the movie illustrates probably Clarke's
uniqueness as a science fiction author in that there is both a great deal of
hard science in it, technology and believable theory and so forth. And on the
other hand, there's also a mysticism. The science is blended with a mystical
vision of man's destiny, of evolution, of man being guided by powers far beyond
his control and knowledge. And that kind of mysticism and science is a very
strange blend in a science fiction author. And I think Clarke, especially the
ending of the movie, I think it's probably the most typical Clarke scene that I
can think of where you have the star child, the fetus being born, I think
symbolically meaning the beginning of a new way of life for people. They've gone
beyond. This is the ape leaped into the man. Man is now going to leap into
something else. The star child would symbolize that. But in between that ending
and the beginning, you have a very scientific movie with a lot of hardware and a
lot of believable devices and so forth. Yes, it starts out on a mystical level
back in prehistoric time, back before man had gained intelligence. And then
after the ape man's encounter with the alien artifact, the movie jumps forward
several thousand years into, I would say, our near future. And several events
transpire on
a shuttlecraft between the Earth and the Moon and then once again on the Moon
when man once again encounters another alien artifact. And then they follow the
signal out to Jupiter and then encounter a third artifact. And then the movie
slips back into the mystical mode where the man travels through all these, I
guess, different dimensionalities, then makes another huge jump in his
evolutionary status up into a higher plane of being, which was represented by
the star child. Some people have puzzled that ending. They left, I talked to
some viewers who left the movie theater with the question, you know, what did
that mean? What was happening? But I'm not sure that's of importance. I think
the feeling you get at the end of it. There's a great sense of optimism, a
feeling of something new that's going to happen, some tremendous breakthrough.
And I think that's all that Clarke intended, just the feeling. You don't have to
explain that logically, what happened. That, and also I believe that he wanted
them to wonder what was happening, or at least he and our Kubrick did. They
didn't want to explain in detail what was going on. They wanted the people to
draw their own conclusion. And I think also the thing that impressed me too
about the movie that's typically Clarke is man being guided by some power toward
some goal, or as a purpose to everything that's happening. And that man has, you
know, a purpose to his life, something he's moving toward, and he's being guided
in that direction.
Clarke, of course, has written many other things besides science fiction. In
fact, I think he got his start, or at least has written very prolifically, many
science essays in a large variety of different areas. He's written on
communication satellites. He wrote, of course, the famous paper that first
described this possibility. But he's also written on the development of
television, worldwide television, the development of the human brain, new
concepts in learning, new ways of farming the sea, and the list goes on and on.
And these are all very interesting things to read. They're written for the
layman. They're not scientific papers in most cases, and are worth reading. Some
of them have been quite influential, haven't they? Particularly the one on
communication satellites. Yes, I believe so. That first one, called
Extraterrestrial Relays, actually went into some of the science involved in
communication satellite concept, how much power would be necessary, how the
satellites would be powered, where you would place them in orbit, and so forth.
I don't believe that first essay actually talked about the geosynchronous
satellite concept that we now accept. I think he missed the boat on that one,
which is understandable. This was, what, back in the early 40s. But a lot of the
analysis he did has shown to be valid in today's world, and he's one of the
first ones who wrote about that. That puts he in a league with very few other
science fiction authors who have written on both science fiction and science
fact. He and Isaac Asimov are the only ones that come to mind. Well, I can think
of a few minor authors, say Fred Hoyle, who's an astronomer and has written a
few novels. And Jerry Pournelle. And Hal Clement. I guess he's a science teacher.
I'm not sure we'd call him a practicing scientist. But Clarke, I think, would be
one of the very few. It's a rare case where you have a man competent in science
who is also a very fine author.
Clarke, of course, uses the science that he is a master of in many of his science fiction writings, too.
And one of the best examples of this is a recent novel called Fountains of Paradise.
The basic concept or the setting behind the novel is the development of a new type of space station, one which is actually anchored to the earth.
Now, this sounds a little bit impossible or a little difficult anyway for someone who's not studied the problem.
But it turns out it may be possible in the near future to build a tower which stretches out into space, something like 50,000 miles, something like that,
but anchored to the earth.
And on the side of the tower or inside the tower, you could put some kind of traveling vehicle, an elevator, that would take you up to space and up to the level of the satellites that we have now.
It would be a much cheaper way to get there.
It would take you a little bit longer, but maybe three or four days to get to orbit instead of just 15 or 20 minutes.
But it would be a much cheaper way to go.
Of course, it requires a type of structural material about five times or ten times stronger than what we have right now, but give the scientists time and they're working on it in their laboratories.
They will probably eventually put it together.
In Fountains of Paradise, Clarke makes some interesting comparisons or contrasts between an ancient ruler of what is actually Ceylon or Sri Lanka, although the country is actually fictionalized to a certain extent.
The ruler is trying to build for himself a lasting monument, and this monument is a very beautiful set of paintings around the inside of a valley, I believe.
And Clarke contrasts this with the building of the space tower and the mastermind, the person behind the building of the tower.
The plot is fairly simple. Something goes wrong in the tower and the mastermind, the hero, goes up and fixes it.
But the view of the tower itself, how it's going to be put together, is rather interesting
and is one that actually would work if we can find the structural materials
necessary, strong enough to actually build this thing. Would there be any sway
to that or would it be absolutely fixed? I mean, would it curve in and out with
storms or winds or would it be absolutely immobile? It actually would curve back
and forth a little bit. In fact, the Earth's gravitational field is not constant
everywhere. There are all sorts of little anomalies in it, little areas of
change. And there are probably, as I understand it, analysis shows that there
are areas on the Earth's surface which are better for anchoring this thing down
than other areas, more stable areas gravitationally. And Sri Lanka, or the
country that Clarke mentions in the novel, turns out to be one of the few
accessible areas on the equator where this can be done. So it becomes a very
important part of the world. It's not an easy thing to do. You could build this
tower in orbit and then fly the end of it down to the Earth and anchor it down
there. It's certainly going to be a monumental engineering task. I think the
science of the book was impressive and I would label it as one of his hard
science novels. But on the other hand, there was a, well not a strange, but to
me an unexpected prologue or ending to the book. It skips forward 1,500 years
into the future. So this tower has been in existence for 1,500 years and
working. And I think there was also a ring, sort of a ring space station around
the Earth at that time that the tower went to. But that last little part is from
the point of view of an alien, a very alien creature who comes to the Earth.
They've made contact with humanity years before and he's talking to the
children. That he's in a party with children and they're admiring the tower. And
marveling at the fact that it's lasted so long, it's been so successful. And the
alien, you're sort of involved in his thought processes and he expresses
admiration both for human beings and for the, what he calls the potential, the
things that these children are going to become. Their mentality is increasing.
It's sort of a, it's sort of the thing that Clarke does at the ending of many of
his books. A destiny statement about where mankind is going. Yes, mankind is
going to undergo a big quantum jump and become something different. Yes. Right,
so even in a hard science book, Clarke could not quite get away from that large
perspective on mankind's goals and changes.
Another example of one of Clarke's hard science books is Rendezvous with Rama.
Rama, this is a novel of discovery and exploration of an incredibly large alien
spacecraft traveling through our solar system. It's detected on the edge of our
solar system and Earth sends up an exploratory team to investigate. And they
find a huge cylindrical spacecraft heading in the direction of our sun. And they
eventually gain access to it and go inside and find it's really a gigantic city.
And they set up a base and begin exploration of this spacecraft. And they never
meet any of the aliens or any alien, intelligent alien life form. I should
preface that. They do meet alien life forms. Although they are never able to
quite describe or discover what they are. They are maintenance people,
personnel. They go about maintaining the space station. Although when they
accidentally kill one of them, they find out that it's not actually a living
organism. It's a constructed organism, even though it's made out of organic
material. They eventually, the spacecraft is divided into two halves separated
by a, if you can imagine, a river that runs around the inside of the cylinder.
They cross this river by use of a very elaborate hang glider, which they are
able to, in the center of the cylinder, where there is zero gravity, they are
able to hang glide across this huge river and explore the far side. They never
really discover the purpose of why the spacecraft is traveling through our solar
system, or who created it, or what its ultimate destination is. They eventually
have to leave the spacecraft before it enters the photosphere of the sun and
starts to burn up. But before it does, it seems to generate some sort of force
field, which protects it from the sun's violent radiation, and it whoops around
the sun in a very tight orbit and heads out of our solar system at an incredible
rate of speed.
Explorers are set about setting up some sort of detection system because they
found out that all the aliens' artifacts and all their constructs inside the
spacecraft were in threes. So they're expecting at least two more of these
spacecrafts to come through our solar system. So at the end of the book, they're
sitting there waiting on the second one to come by. Of course, I think we would
classify this as a particular form of first contact novel. A particular form in
that you never meet the aliens, but on the other hand, you have proof that here
is an alien culture, which is far superior to our own. We don't seem to learn
much from it, but the people, the humans who experience this, are in awe at the
power. They wonder at the purpose of it. And I think what Clarke does in the
novel also is classify the various reactions that people have. For instance, at
this time, I think it's a few hundred years into the future, and man is spread
partially through the solar system to some of the habitable planets and moons of
the solar system. And one group of humans on Hermes, which is Mercury, their
reaction to this is total fear, xenophobia. It's alien. It must be hostile.
Let's destroy it. So they send an armed nuclear device to destroy it while the
exploratory party from Earth is exploring. And of course, the good guys, the
protagonist, is able to disarm the device before it does any harm. Other people
simply are, their reaction is simply one of awe, curiosity. You know, where did
these people come from? Are there going to be more ships? What can we learn from
it? But it is a first contact story of a particular kind, and I think it is very
effective as such. Of course, it won the two major science fiction writing
awards, the Nebula and the Hugo Awards, in addition to others. One of the things
that impressed me about it was the concept of genetic engineering. We talk about
biological engineering now in the sense of maybe in a few years we'll be able to
control the color of our baby's eyes by changing gene structures before he's
born, this sort of thing. But Clarke has taken this concept and gone and run with
it and carried it much further than most of us would. If you can imagine, he
thinks about this in the novel. The people who built the novel, the alien
creatures that built the novel, may actually be on board somewhere in the form
of DNA. They don't have bodies. Their genetic information has been stored. And
when it becomes necessary or convenient for them to be reconstituted, the
construct of the space station will do it automatically. This is a very alien
concept to us, of course, to have our bodies wiped out or have ourselves, our
basic identities, reduced down to something in the order of DNA. But it shows
one of the things that Clarke is capable of doing. He'll take any concept he
comes across and many that he invents himself and takes it as far as he possibly
can and get some very striking results out of it. I enjoyed that. I think the
ending is particularly interesting, too, as I would say all of Clarke's work. The
endings are very upbeat. But the scene where this huge ship, the humans are not
sure what's going to happen. It's heading toward the sun. They're almost certain
it's going to be destroyed in the sun because the gravitational pull and so
forth. But this huge ship approaches the sun, and as they're far away from it
watching it, it exerts tremendous power and sort of sucks energy out of the sun,
wraps itself in a cocoon from the sun's energy in preparation to launching
itself off further in the direction it's going. But there's a beauty to that in
the sense of an indifference to humanity. All we can do is sit and watch with
awe at the power, wonder at the purpose of this huge device. That ending almost
becomes mystical, even though this is definitely a hard science book. But you
get a tremendous sense of awe, you know, something beyond human potential and
capabilities, which is occurring. Would you say that Clarke, in many of his
novels, has constructed almost a scientific religion, or he has this kind of
feeling behind a lot of his works? Yes, some commentators have said that, that
he has a vision of mankind's destiny, a purpose, a goal. Man is evolving towards
something beyond himself, perhaps pure mentality, pure spirituality. But I think
that can be seen in a great deal of his works.
Another side of Clarke, and I think it's going to be the one that he's most
remembered for, is what some authors or commentators call his mystical side. The
first major novel that he wrote in this mode was written in 1953 and entitled
Against the Fall of Night. But he changed the title in 1956 and called it The
City and the Stars. And some people are confused by that change of title, but
the title that goes by now is The City and the Stars. The scene is at least a
billion years into the future, which is a little uncharacteristic for Clarke.
This is way far into the future. And mankind has changed drastically. Earth is
almost totally a desert. There are no oceans, salt flats, and dust is about all
there is left on the earth. There is one great city called Diaspar with, oh, a
few million people in it, but it's the only city left. It's a domed city, and
the people within it cannot experience the outside world. They are immortal.
They're far enough in the future where they have conquered death. They live
forever. There's no population growth. There's very little. Machines do
everything for them. These machines have no moving parts. They will never wear
out. They would be called perpetual motion machines. The people don't understand
the machines, but they don't have to because the machines will never break down.
There is no sickness, no want. You know, the people lack for nothing. It's a
true utopia. The one flaw that they have is stagnation. They have a terrible
fear of ever trying to get outside of the dome of Diaspar, the city. They are
very insular. They have no curiosity. The protagonist in the novel is named
Alvin. He's a young man. I think we would call him a teenager, even though he's
7,000 years old. He's the last person born in this city. And even though he has
the age of 7,000 years, he is still considered a youth or a boy to the people of
that city. He's different. He's inquisitive. He's curious. He wants to leave the
city and find out what's outside. He does this. He finds a way out of the city,
which was quite difficult in itself. And he makes his way to another community
of humans, the only other community of humans on the earth. And it's called Lys.
It's the exact opposite of Diaspar. The people have no technology. They are not
immortal. They do have curiosity and drive left to them, which the people of
Diaspar did not. These people knew of the existence of Diaspar, but they want
nothing to do with the inhabitants of that city. Along with one of the people of
Lys, Alvin discovers an old man who is dying. And in the man's possession are
three robots. Before the man dies, he gives one of the robots to Alvin and says
that these robots belong to a person called the Master, who served the Great
Ones. The Great Ones have now left, and the old man is awaiting them. According
to him, they'll be back someday. With the robot, which has incredible powers,
Alvin finds a ship, which has been left by the Master. He gets into the ship and
lets it go where it will. And it travels much faster than the speed of light.
And finally, after a journey of only a few hours, arrives at the center of the
galaxy, where Alvin sees something that is called the Seven Suns. These are
stars which have been constructed. They are artificial constructions with a huge
planet among them. Well, there are many planets, but on one of the planets, he
finds what must have been the hub of the greatest galactic culture of all time.
Tremendous achievements in engineering. Cities, which are now deserted. There's
nothing left there. It's totally empty.
Before Alvin leaves, a creature called Vanamonde comes. Vanamonde is what we would
call a supermind. Vanamonde has been created by the so-called Great Ones. Alvin
still doesn't know who these Great Ones were. But Vanamonde, even though he's a
supermind, is sort of childlike in his innocence. And he accompanies Alvin back
to Earth, where he tells all he knows about mankind's past history. And the
story that Vanamonde tells fills in the knowledge that Alvin needs to recover his
past, or the past of the human race. And briefly, it's this. Millions of years
into the past, man had split. One group had gone out into the galaxy, into the
universe, achieved a great culture, united with other races, and had achieved a
level of pure mentality. Their minds, mind over matter to put it simply. Their
minds could control matter. They
formed what I think would be called almost an overmind in childhood's end. One
group of humans did not become part of this group. They were the other half of
this split. They were afraid of going out into the galaxy. They stayed on Earth.
They built domed cities, and they became very fearful and insular. Now the whole
universe seems to be empty, because the Great Ones, by the way, turned out to be
this other half of the human race, the ones who would achieve this high level.
They had detected a far superior civilization outside the confines of the
universe. Clarke says, beyond the curve of the cosmos, they had detected signals
of a civilization even more advanced than they were. They left. They left
Vanamonde. They created Vanamonde as sort of the supermind of their existence that
contained all of their past, their memories, and so forth. And they left to
follow this other race, see if they could detect it. The Master was simply one
of the Great Ones. He left the ship. He left the robots. Probably, we're not
sure of this, but probably hoping that somebody would find the robots in the
ship someday. And, anyhow, Alvin sends the ship off. It's totally automatic. It
has tremendous power. Sends the ship off to find the Great Ones, the other,
whatever humanity has become, you know, beyond the confines of this universe.
Whatever they've become, the ship will find them, will signal to them that their
cousins, their brothers are now interested in reestablishing contact and so
forth. And the ending of the book is, again, typically Clarke. You have a picture
of this ship going off into the unknown, establishing contact with a race,
whatever humans have become. And this race presumably will lift their cousins or
their brothers, the ones left on Earth, lift them out of their fear, their
stagnation, and they can go on to become the new thing, the thing that mankind
is destined to become that Clarke seems to eternally visualize.
Arthur C. Clarke is one of the world's best known and most respected science
fiction authors. Many of his works will have a lasting impression in science
fiction literature and Len literature in general, and in the years to come, he
will probably be remembered with such greats as H.G. Wells, Jules Verne.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, in conjunction with Odessa College and KOCV-FM.